---
layout:     post
title:      Proximal point algorithm revisited, episode 3. Catalyst acceleration
date:       2018-01-24 17:03:00 -0700
summary:    Revisiting the proximal point method, and catalyst generic acceleration for regularized Empirical Risk Minimization.
author:     Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy
image:      images/prox.png
image_url:  http://sites.math.washington.edu/~ddrusv/
categories: blog
---

This is episode 3 of the three part series that revisits the classical proximal
point algorithm. See the [first post on the subject](../../../01/24/proximal-point) for 
introduction and notation.

<a name="sec3"></a>Catalyst acceleration
=====================

In the previous posts, we looked at the 
[proximally guided subgradient method](../proximal-subgrad)
and the [prox-linear algorithm](../prox-linear).
The final example concerns inertial acceleration in convex optimization.
Setting the groundwork, consider a $$\mu$$-strongly convex function $$f$$
with a $$\beta$$-Lipschitz gradient map $$x\mapsto \nabla f(x)$$.
Classically, gradient descent will find a point $$x$$ satisfying
$$f(x)-\min f<\varepsilon$$ after at most

$$
O\left(\frac{\beta}{\mu}\ln(1/\varepsilon)\right)
$$ 

iterations.
Accelerated gradient methods, beginning with Nesterov (1983),
equip the gradient descent method with an inertial correction. Such
methods have the much lower complexity guarantee

$$
O\left(\sqrt{\frac{\beta}{\mu}}\ln(1/\varepsilon)\right),
$$ 

which is
optimal within the first-order oracle model of computation (Nemirovsky
and Yudin 1983).

It is natural to ask which other methods, aside from gradient descent,
can be "accelerated". For example, one may wish to accelerate coordinate
descent or so-called variance reduced methods for finite sum problems; I
will comment on the latter problem class shortly.

One appealing strategy relies on the proximal point method. Güler (1992) 
showed that the proximal point method itself can be
equipped with inertial steps leading to improved convergence guarantees.
Building on this work, Lin, Mairal, and Harchaoui (2015) explained how to derive the *total* complexity
guarantees for an inexact accelerated proximal point method that take
into account the cost of applying an arbitrary linearly convergent
algorithm $$\mathcal{M}$$ to the subproblems. Their *Catalyst
acceleration* framework is summarized below. The code for 
Catalyst is publicly available [here](https://github.com/hongzhoulin89/Catalyst-QNing).

#### Catalyst Acceleration

-   **Data**: $$x_0\in {\mathbb R}^d$$, $$\kappa>0$$, algorithm
    $$\mathcal{M}$$

-   Set $$q= \mu/(\mu+\kappa)$$, $$\alpha_0=\sqrt{q}$$, and $$y_0=x_0$$

-   **For** $$t=0,\ldots,T$$ **do**

    -   Use $$\mathcal{M}$$ to approximately solve:

        $$
        x_t\approx \underset{x \in {\mathbb R}^d}{\operatorname{argmin}} \left\{F(x)+\frac{\kappa}{2}\|x-y_{t-1}\|^2\right\}.\;
        $$

    -   Compute $$\alpha_t\in (0,1)$$ from the equation
        
        $$
        \alpha_t^2=(1-\alpha_t)\alpha_{t-1}^2+q\alpha_t.\;
        $$

    -   Compute: 

        $$
        \begin{aligned}
        \beta_t&=\frac{\alpha_{t-1}(1-\alpha_{t-1})}{\alpha_{t-1}^2+\alpha_t},\\
        y_t&=x_t+\beta_t(x_t-x_{t-1}). 
        \end{aligned}
        $$

To state the guarantees of this method, suppose that $$\mathcal{M}$$
converges on the proximal subproblem in function value at a linear rate
$$1-\tau\in (0,1)$$. Then a simple termination policy on the subproblems
to solve for $$x_t$$ yields an algorithm with overall
complexity 

$$
\widetilde{O}\left(\frac{\sqrt{\mu+\kappa}}{\tau \sqrt{\mu}}\ln(1/\varepsilon)\right).
$$

That is, the expression
above describes the maximal number of iterations of
$$\mathcal{M}$$ used by the Catalyst algorithm until it finds a point $$x$$
satisfying $$f(x)-\inf f\leq \varepsilon$$. Typically $$\tau$$ depends on
$$\kappa$$; therefore the best choice of $$\kappa$$ is the one that
minimizes the ratio $$\frac{\sqrt{\mu+\kappa}}{\tau \sqrt{\mu}}$$.

The main motivation for the Catalyst framework, and its most potent
application, is the regularized Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM)
problem:

$$
\min_{x\in {\mathbb R}^d} f(x):=\frac{1}{m}\sum_{i=1}^m f_i(x)+g(x).
$$

Such large-finite sum problems are ubiquitous in machine learning and
high-dimensional statistics, where each function $$f_i$$ typically models
a misfit between predicted and observed data while $$g$$ promotes some low
dimensional structure on $$x$$, such as sparsity or low-rank.

Assume that $$f$$ is $$\mu$$-strongly convex and each individual $$f_i$$ is
$$C^1$$-smooth with $$\beta$$-Lipschitz gradient. Since $$m$$ is assumed to be
huge, the complexity of numerical methods is best measured in terms of
the total number of individual gradient evaluations $$\nabla f_i$$. In
particular, fast gradient methods have the worst-case complexity

$$
O\left(m\sqrt{\frac{\beta}{\mu}}\ln(1/\varepsilon)\right),
$$ 

since
each iteration requires evaluation of all the individual gradients
$$\{\nabla f_i(x)\}_{i=1}^m$$. Variance reduced algorithms, such as SAG
(Schmidt, Roux, and Bach 2013), SAGA (Defazio, Bach, and Lacoste-Julien
2014), SDCA (Shalev-Shwartz and Zhang 2012), SMART (Davis 2016), SVRG
(Johnson and Zhang 2013; Xiao and Zhang 2014), FINITO (Defazio, Domke,
and Caetano 2014), and MISO (Mairal 2015; Lin, Mairal, and Harchaoui
2015), aim to improve the dependence on $$m$$. In their raw form, all of
these methods exhibit a similar complexity

$$
O\left(\left(m+\frac{\beta}{\mu}\right)\ln(1/\varepsilon)\right),
$$

in
expectation, and differ only in storage requirements and in whether one
needs to know explicitly the strong convexity constant.

It was a long standing open question to determine if the dependence on
$$\beta/\mu$$ can be improved. This is not quite possible in full
generality, and instead one should expect a rate of the form

$$
O\left(\left(m+\sqrt{m\frac{\beta}{\mu}}\right)\ln(1/\varepsilon)\right).
$$

Indeed, such a rate would be optimal in an appropriate oracle model of
complexity (Woodworth and Srebro 2016; Arjevani 2017; Agarwal and Bottou
2015; Lan 2015). Thus acceleration for ERM problems is only beneficial
in the setting $$m< \beta/\mu$$.

Early examples for specific algorithms are the accelerated SDCA
(Shalev-Shwartz and Zhang 2015), APPA (Frostig et al. 2015), and RPDG
(Lan 2015).[^4] The accelerated SDCA and APPA, in particular, use a
specialized proximal-point construction.[^5] Catalyst generic
acceleration allows to accelerate all of the variance reduced methods
above in a single conceptually transparent framework. It is worth noting
that the first direct accelerated variance reduced methods for ERM
problems were recently proposed in Allen-Zhu (2016) and Defazio (2016).

In contrast to the convex setting, the role of inertia for nonconvex
problems is not nearly as well understood. In particular, gradient
descent is black-box optimal for $$C^1$$-smooth nonconvex minimization
(Carmon et al. 2017b), and therefore inertia can not help in the worst
case. On the other hand, the recent paper (Carmon et al. 2017a) presents
a first-order method for minimizing $$C^2$$ and $$C^3$$ smooth functions
that is provably faster than gradient descent. At its core, their
algorithm also combines inertia with the proximal point method. For a
partial extension of the Catalyst framework to weakly convex problems,
see Paquette et al. (2017).


Conclusion
==========

The proximal point method has long been ingrained in the foundations of
optimization. Recent progress in large scale computing has shown that
the proximal point method is not only conceptual, but can guide
methodology. Though direct methods are usually preferable, proximally
guided algorithms can be equally effective and often lead to more easily
interpretable numerical methods. In this blog, I outlined three examples
of this viewpoint, where the proximal-point method guides both the
design and analysis of numerical methods.

#### Acknowledgements
The author thanks Damek Davis, John Duchi, and Zaid Harchaoui for their
helpful comments on an early draft.


[^4]: Here, I am ignoring logarithmic terms in the convergence rate.

[^5]: The accelerated SDCA was the motivation for the Catalyst
    framework, while APPA appeared concurrently with Catalyst.


References<a name="ref"></a>
==========
Abbe, E., A.S. Bandeira, A. Bracher, and A. Singer. 2014. "Decoding
Binary Node Labels from Censored Edge Measurements: Phase Transition and
Efficient Recovery." *IEEE Trans. Network Sci. Eng.* 1 (1):10--22.
<https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSE.2014.2368716>.


Agarwal, A., and L. Bottou. 2015. "A Lower Bound for the Optimization of
Finite Sums." In *Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on
Machine Learning, ICML 2015, Lille, France, 6-11 July 2015*, 78--86.
<http://leon.bottou.org/papers/agarwal-bottou-2015>.



Allen-Zhu, Z. 2016. "Katyusha: The First Direct Acceleration of
Stochastic Gradient Methods." *Preprint arXiv:1603.05953 (Version 5)*.


Arjevani, Y. 2017. "Limitations on Variance-Reduction and Acceleration
Schemes for Finite Sums Optimization." In *Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 30*, edited by I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg,
S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett,
3543--52. Curran Associates, Inc.
<http://papers.nips.cc/paper/6945-limitations-on-variance-reduction-and-acceleration-schemes-for-finite-sums-optimization.pdf>.


Bandeira, A.S., N. Boumal, and V. Voroninski. 2016. "On the Low-Rank
Approach for Semidefinite Programs Arising in Synchronization and
Community Detection." In *Proceedings of the 29th Conference on Learning
Theory, COLT 2016, New York, Usa, June 23-26, 2016*, 361--82.
<http://jmlr.org/proceedings/papers/v49/bandeira16.html>.


Bartlett, P.L., M.I. Jordan, and J.D. McAuliffe. 2006. "Convexity,
Classification, and Risk Bounds." *J. Amer. Statist. Assoc.* 101
(473):138--56.
<https://doi-org.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/10.1198/016214505000000907>.



Beck, A., and M. Teboulle. 2012. "Smoothing and First Order Methods: A
Unified Framework." *SIAM J. Optim.* 22 (2):557--80.
<https://doi.org/10.1137/100818327>.



Bottou, L., and O. Bousquet. 2008. "The Tradeoffs of Large Scale
Learning." In *Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems*,
161--68. <http://leon.bottou.org/publications/pdf/nips-2007.pdf>.



Burke, J.V., and M.C. Ferris. 1995. "A Gauss-Newton Method for Convex
Composite Optimization." *Math. Programming* 71 (2, Ser. A):179--94.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01585997>.



Candès, E.J., X. Li, Y. Ma, and J. Wright. 2011. "Robust Principal
Component Analysis?" *J. ACM* 58 (3):Art. 11, 37.
<https://doi.org/10.1145/1970392.1970395>.



Candès, E.J., X. Li, and M. Soltanolkotabi. 2015. "Phase Retrieval via
Wirtinger Flow: Theory and Algorithms." *IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory* 61
(4):1985--2007. <https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2015.2399924>.



Carmon, Y., J.C. Duchi, O. Hinder, and A. Sidford. 2017a. "'Convex Until
Proven Guilty': Dimension-Free Acceleration of Gradient Descent on
Non-Convex Functions." In *Proceedings of the 34th International
Conference on Machine Learning*, 70:654--63.



Y. Carmon, J.C. Duchi, O. Hinder, and A. Sidford. Lower bounds for finding stationary points I.
*Preprint arXiv:1710.11606*.



Cartis, C., N.I.M. Gould, and P.L. Toint. 2011. "On the Evaluation
Complexity of Composite Function Minimization with Applications to
Nonconvex Nonlinear Programming." *SIAM J. Optim.* 21 (4):1721--39.
<https://doi.org/10.1137/11082381X>.



Chambolle, A., and T. Pock. 2011. "A First-Order Primal-Dual Algorithm
for Convex Problems with Applications to Imaging." *J. Math. Imaging
Vision* 40 (1):120--45. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10851-010-0251-1>.



Chandrasekaran, V., S. Sanghavi, P. A. Parrilo, and A.S. Willsky. 2011.
"Rank-Sparsity Incoherence for Matrix Decomposition." *SIAM J. Optim.*
21 (2):572--96. <https://doi.org/10.1137/090761793>.



Chen, Y., and E.J. Candès. 2017. "Solving Random Quadratic Systems of
Equations Is Nearly as Easy as Solving Linear Systems." *Comm. Pure
Appl. Math.* 70 (5):822--83.
<https://doi-org.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/10.1002/cpa.21638>.



Davis, D. 2016. "SMART: The Stochastic Monotone Aggregated Root-Finding
Algorithm." *Preprint arXiv:1601.00698*.



Davis, D., D. Drusvyatskiy, and C. Paquette. 2017. "The Nonsmooth
Landscape of Phase Retrieval." *Preprint arXiv:1711.03247*.



Davis, D., and B. Grimmer. 2017. "Proximally Guided Stochastic
Sbgradient Method for Nonsmooth, Nonconvex Problems." *Preprint,
arXiv:1707.03505*.



Defazio, A. 2016. "A Simple Practical Accelerated Method for Finite
Sums." In *Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29*, edited
by D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. V. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett,
676--84. Curran Associates, Inc.
<http://papers.nips.cc/paper/6154-a-simple-practical-accelerated-method-for-finite-sums.pdf>.



Defazio, A., F. Bach, and S. Lacoste-Julien. 2014. "SAGA: A Fast
Incremental Gradient Method with Support for Non-Strongly Convex
Composite Objectives." In *Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 27*, edited by Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. D.
Lawrence, and K. Q. Weinberger, 1646--54. Curran Associates, Inc.



Defazio, A., J. Domke, and T.S. Caetano. 2014. "Finito: A Faster,
Permutable Incremental Gradient Method for Big Data Problems." In
*ICML*, 1125--33.



Drusvyatskiy, D., and A.S. Lewis. 2013. "Tilt Stability, Uniform
Quadratic Growth, and Strong Metric Regularity of the Subdifferential."
*SIAM J. Optim.* 23 (1):256--67. <https://doi.org/10.1137/120876551>.


D. Drusvyatskiy and A.S. Lewis. 2016. "Error Bounds, Quadratic Growth, and Linear Convergence
of Proximal Methods." *To Appear in Math. Oper. Res., arXiv:1602.06661*.



Drusvyatskiy, D., B.S. Mordukhovich, and T.T.A. Nghia. 2014.
"Second-Order Growth, Tilt-Stability, and Metric Regularity of the
Subdifferential." *J. Convex Anal.* 21 (4):1165--92.



Drusvyatskiy, D., and C. Paquette. 2016. "Efficiency of Minimizing
Compositions of Convex Functions and Smooth Maps." *Preprint,
arXiv:1605.00125*.



Duchi, J.C., and F. Ruan. 2017a. "Solving (Most) of a Set of Quadratic
Equalities: Composite Optimization for Robust Phase Retrieval."
*Preprint arXiv:1705.02356*.



J.C. Duchi and F. Ruan. 2017b. "Stochastic Methods for Composite Optimization
Problems." *Preprint arXiv:1703.08570*.



Eldar, Y.C., and S. Mendelson. 2014. "Phase Retrieval: Stability and
Recovery Guarantees." *Appl. Comput. Harmon. Anal.* 36 (3):473--94.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acha.2013.08.003>.



Frostig, R., R. Ge, S.M. Kakade, and A. Sidford. 2015. "Un-Regularizing:
Approximate Proximal Point and Faster Stochastic Algorithms for
Empirical Risk Minimization." In *Proceedings of the 32nd International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)*.



Ghadimi, S., and G. Lan. 2013. "Stochastic First- and Zeroth-Order
Methods for Nonconvex Stochastic Programming." *SIAM J. Optim.* 23
(4):2341--68. <https://doi.org/10.1137/120880811>.



Güler, O. 1992. "New Proximal Point Algorithms for Convex Minimization."
*SIAM J. Optim.* 2 (4):649--64.
<https://doi-org.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/10.1137/0802032>.



Hazan, E., and S. Kale. 2011. "Beyond the Regret Minimization Barrier:
An Optimal Algorithm for Stochastic Strongly-Convex Optimization." In
*Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference on Learning Theory*, edited
by Sham M. Kakade and Ulrike von Luxburg, 19:421--36. Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research. Budapest, Hungary: PMLR.



Johnson, R., and T. Zhang. 2013. "Accelerating Stochastic Gradient
Descent Using Predictive Variance Reduction." In *Proceedings of the
26th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems*,
315--23. NIPS'13. USA: Curran Associates Inc.
<http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2999611.2999647>.


Juditsky, A., and Y. Nesterov. 2014. "Deterministic and Stochastic
Primal-Dual Subgradient Algorithms for Uniformly Convex Minimization."
*Stoch. Syst.* 4 (1):44--80.
<https://doi-org.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/10.1214/10-SSY010>.



Lacoste-Julien, S., M. Schmidt, and F. Bach. 2012. "A Simpler Approach
to Obtaining an $${O}(1/t)$$ Convergence Rate for the Projected Stochastic
Subgradient Method." *Arxiv arXiv:1212.2002*.



Lan, G. 2015. "An Optimal Randomized Incremental Gradient Method."
*arXiv:1507.02000*.



Lemarechal, C., J.-J. Strodiot, and A. Bihain. 1981. "On a Bundle
Algorithm for Nonsmooth Optimization." In *Nonlinear Programming, 4
(Madison, Wis., 1980)*, 245--82. Academic Press, New York-London.



Lewis, A.S., and S.J. Wright. 2015. "A Proximal Method for Composite
Minimization." *Math. Program.* Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1--46.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10107-015-0943-9>.



Lin, H., J. Mairal, and Z. Harchaoui. 2015. "A Universal Catalyst for
First-Order Optimization." In *Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems*, 3366--74. [Arxiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.05654)



Luke, R. 2017. "Phase Retrieval, What's New?" *SIAG/OPT Views and News*
25 (1).



Mairal, J. 2015. "Incremental Majorization-Minimization Optimization
with Application to Large-Scale Machine Learning." *SIAM Journal on
Optimization* 25 (2):829--55.



Nemirovski, A. 2004. "Prox-Method with Rate of Convergence $$O(1/t)$$ for
Variational Inequalities with Lipschitz Continuous Monotone Operators
and Smooth Convex-Concave Saddle Point Problems." *SIAM J. Optim.* 15
(1):229--51. <https://doi.org/10.1137/S1052623403425629>.



Nemirovski, A., A. Juditsky, G. Lan, and A. Shapiro. 2008. "Robust
Stochastic Approximation Approach to Stochastic Programming." *SIAM J.
Optim.* 19 (4):1574--1609.
<https://doi-org.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/10.1137/070704277>.



Nemirovsky, A.S., and D.B. Yudin. 1983. *Problem Complexity and Method
Efficiency in Optimization*. A Wiley-Interscience Publication. John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.



Nesterov, Y., and A. Nemirovskii. 1994. *Interior-Point Polynomial
Algorithms in Convex Programming*. Vol. 13. SIAM Studies in Applied
Mathematics. Society for Industrial; Applied Mathematics (SIAM),
Philadelphia, PA. <https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611970791>.



Nesterov, Yu. 1983. "A Method for Solving the Convex Programming Problem
with Convergence Rate $$O(1/k^{2})$$." *Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR* 269
(3):543--47.


Nesterov, Yu. 2005. "Smooth Minimization of Non-Smooth Functions." *Math.
Program.* 103 (1, Ser. A):127--52.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10107-004-0552-5>.


Nesterov, Yu. 2007. "Modified Gauss-Newton Scheme with Worst Case
Guarantees for Global Performance." *Optim. Methods Softw.* 22
(3):469--83. <https://doi.org/10.1080/08927020600643812>.


Nesterov, Yu. 2013. "Gradient Methods for Minimizing Composite Functions."
*Math. Program.* 140 (1, Ser. B):125--61.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10107-012-0629-5>.



Paquette, C., H. Lin, D. Drusvyatskiy, J. Mairal, and Z. Harchaoui. 2017. 
"Catalyst Acceleration for Gradient-Based Non-Convex
Optimization." *Preprint arXiv:1703.10993*.



Polyak, B.T., and A.B. Juditsky. 1992. "Acceleration of Stochastic
Approximation by Averaging." *SIAM J. Control Optim.* 30 (4):838--55.
<https://doi.org/10.1137/0330046>.


Rakhlin, A., O. Shamir, and K. Sridharan. 2012. "Making Gradient Descent
Optimal for Strongly Convex Stochastic Optimization." In *Proceedings of
the 29th International Coference on International Conference on Machine
Learning*, 1571--8. ICML'12. USA: Omnipress.
<http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3042573.3042774>.



Robbins, H., and S. Monro. 1951. "A Stochastic Approximation Method."
*Ann. Math. Statistics* 22:400--407.



Schmidt, M., N. Le Roux, and F. Bach. 2013. "Minimizing Finite Sums with
the Stochastic Average Gradient." *arXiv:1309.2388*.


Shalev-Shwartz, S., and T. Zhang. 2012. "Proximal Stochastic Dual
Coordinate Ascent." *arXiv:1211.2717*.


S. Shalev-Shwartz and T. Zhang. 2015. "Accelerated Proximal Stochastic Dual Coordinate Ascent
for Regularized Loss Minimization." *Mathematical Programming*.



Singer, A. 2011. "Angular Synchronization by Eigenvectors and
Semidefinite Programming." *Appl. Comput. Harmon. Anal.* 30 (1):20--36.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acha.2010.02.001>.



Sun, J., Q. Qu, and J. Wright. 2017. "A Geometric Analysis of Phase
Retrieval." *To Appear in Found. Comp. Math., arXiv:1602.06664*.



Woodworth, B.E., and N. Srebro. 2016. "Tight Complexity Bounds for
Optimizing Composite Objectives." In *Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 29*, edited by D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. V. Luxburg,
I. Guyon, and R. Garnett, 3639--47. Curran Associates, Inc.
<http://papers.nips.cc/paper/6058-tight-complexity-bounds-for-optimizing-composite-objectives.pdf>.



Wright, S.J. 1997. *Primal-Dual Interior-Point Methods*. Society for
Industrial; Applied Mathematics (SIAM), Philadelphia, PA.
<https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611971453>.



Xiao, L., and T. Zhang. 2014. "A Proximal Stochastic Gradient Method
with Progressive Variance Reduction." *SIAM J. Optim.* 24 (4):2057--75.
<https://doi.org/10.1137/140961791>.


